Update KMP Compatibility Guide for 1.9.20 (#3789)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/multiplatform/multiplatform-compatibility-guide.md

**When do the changes take effect?**

> * 1.8.20: report a warning when these properties are used

Reviewer: We already used this approach in the Multiplatform compatibility guide when we have a list for deprecation cycles. Now it's consistent in all sections

Here we follow Kotlin compatibility guides that have described the cycle in this way since [Kotlin 1.4](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/compatibility-guide-14.html)

> * 1.8.20: report a warning when these properties are used

Author: Well from the link the difference is quite clear. The linked page (and any of the language compatibility pages) doesn't give any single recommendation to users, like "Migrate your code by replacing...". And KMP Compatibility page does that all over the place.

Which one is the proper way is an open question, but it's clear that decision from Language Compatibility Guide can't be blindly retrofitted to KMP Compatibiltiy Guide. They're written in significantly different styles.

> * 1.8.20: report a warning when these properties are used

Reviewer: But these are different sections. We give recommendations to users in the **What's the best practice now?** section, and the **When do the changes take effect?** section just lists Kotlin versions that describe the deprecation cycle as stated in the header, which is exactly the same as in Kotlin compatibility guides 

added a sentence about the deprecation cycle

> * 1.8.20: report a warning when these properties are used

Author: Ok

        }

        // Option #1. Shorter and more readable, use it when possible:
        val jvmMain by getting { // Usually, the name of the default source set 

>             // is a simple concatenation of the target name and the compilation name

Reviewer: I does look better, thanks!

**When do the changes take effect?**

In Kotlin 1.9.0, a deprecation warning is introduced when the `android` name is used in Kotlin Multiplatform projects.

<anchor name="declaring-multiple-targets"></anchor>
## Declaring multiple targets of the same kind

**What's changed?**

We discourage declaring multiple targets of the same kind in a single Gradle project.

Example:
```kotlin
kotlin {
    jvm("jvmKtor")
    jvm("jvmOkio") // is not recommended and will produce deprecation warning
}
```

One popular case is having two related pieces of code together. For example, you might be compelled to use
`jvm("jvmKtor")` and `jvm("jvmOkio")` in your `:shared` Gradle project for providing an implementation of networking

> code based on Ktor or OKIO:

Reviewer 2: FWIW, the example might be better with `Ktor` & `OkHttp`. Okio is the low level IO library but doesn't deal with networking.

Author: Indeed, that was a brainlag from me (though about `OkHttp` but typed `Okio`). Thanks for pointing out, Martin! 👍 

cc @danil-pavlov could you fix that during the TW editing?

            // ... copy the configuration of jvmCommonMain here ...
        }
    }
}
```

2. Add two new Gradle projects, usually by calling `include` in your `settings.gradle.kts`. For example:

```kotlin
include(":okio-impl")
include(":ktor-impl")
```

3. Configure each new Gradle project
   - Most likely, you don't need to apply `kotlin("multiplatform")` plugin, as those projects will compile only for one
   target. In our case, we can apply `kotlin("jvm")`
   - Move the content of original target-specific source sets to their respective projects, e.g. from `jvmKtorMain` to 
   `ktor-impl/src`
   - Copy the configuration of source sets (dependencies, compiler options, etc.)
   - Add a dependency from a new Gradle project to the original one.

```kotlin
// ktor-impl/build.gradle.kts
plugins {
    kotlin("jvm")
}

dependencies {
    project(":shared") // add dependency on the original project
    // ... copy dependencies of jvmKtorMain here ...
}

kotlin {
    compilerOptions {
        // ... copy compiler options of jvmKtorMain here ...
    }
}
```

While this approach requires more initial setup work, it doesn't use any low-level entities of Gradle and KGP, making

> easier to work with the resulting build and maintain it.

Reviewer 2: I think where this falls short is tests? Suppose you had a common test suite that tested both `ktor` and `okhttp` clients. The code in the tests is all the same, it just expects a HTTP client:

```kotlin
// commonMain
interface HttpClient { ... }
expect fun HttpClient(): HttpClient

// commonTest
@Test 
fun testClient() {
  assertThat(HttpClient().get("https://...").data).isEqualsTo("Hello World")
}
```

With multiple JVM targets, it was only a matter of defining 2 actuals:

```kotlin
// ktorMain
actual fun HttpClient() = KtorHttpClient()

// okHttpMain
actual fun HttpClient() = OkHttpClient()
```

Now with different Gradle projects, how would one do this? `expect`/`actual` do not cross Gradle projects boundaries. And duplicating the test code doesn't feel great. Any thoughts?

Author: That's true. The brutally honest description for this deprecation would've been something like: "if you've encountered this deprecation, and you don't see an easy way to migrate your project, then reach us and tell more about your case". 

But that would be a bit unfriendly, so we tried our best to provide some intrsuctions which applicable at least in some cases. It is expected that these instructions miss some cases, and we'll be happy to learn if someone encounters such cases in real projects

Reviewer 2: We actually have this exact `expect`/`actual` scenario [in this integration test](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-kotlin/blob/main/tests/engine/src/commonTest/kotlin/engines.kt#L4). I've turned this problem upside down but still not sure how to convert. Any guidance would be super welcome.

Reviewer 2: Just took another look at it. In the current state, it's working with a single JVM target and 2 compilations but shows this warning:

```
w: Kotlin Source Set 'ktorTest' can't depend on 'commonTest' as they are from different Source Set Trees.
Please remove this dependency edge.
```

I'm not sure how to remove the common source set without breaking the `expect`/`actual`

In Kotlin 1.9.0, a deprecation warning is introduced when the `android` name is used in Kotlin Multiplatform projects.

<anchor name="declaring-multiple-targets"></anchor>

> ## Declaring multiple targets of the same type

Reviewer: we can avoid terms here with 'similar', for example

> ## Declaring multiple targets of the same type

Author: Yes, "similar" works

   * Add a dependency from a new Gradle project to the original one.

    ```kotlin
    // ktor-impl/build.gradle.kts:
    plugins {
        kotlin("jvm")
    }
    
    dependencies {
        project(":shared") // Add dependency on the original project
        // Copy dependencies of jvmKtorMain here
    }
    
    kotlin {
        compilerOptions {
            // Copy compiler options of jvmKtorMain here
        }
    }
    ```

While this approach requires more work on the initial setup, it doesn't use any low-level entities of Gradle and
the Kotlin Gradle plugin, making it easier to use and maintain the resulting build.

> Unfortunately, we can't provide detailed migration steps for each case. If the instructions above don't work
> for you, describe your case in this [YouTrack issue](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-59316).
>
{type="tip"}

**When do the changes take effect?**

* 1.9.20: introduce a deprecation warning when multiple targets of the same type are used in Kotlin Multiplatform projects
* 2.0: report an error in such cases, causing the build to fail

<anchor name="jvmWithJava-preset-deprecation"></anchor>

> ## Deprecated the jvmWithJava preset

Author: Minor: weird wording, probably a typo

Reviewer: true

We discourage declaring several similar targets in a single Gradle project. For example:

```kotlin
kotlin {
    jvm("jvmKtor")
    jvm("jvmOkHttp") // Not recommended and produces a deprecation warning
}
```

One popular case is having two related pieces of code together. For example, you might want to use
`jvm("jvmKtor")` and `jvm("jvmOkHttp")` in your `:shared` Gradle project to implement networking using the Ktor
or OkHttp libraries:

```kotlin
// shared/build.gradle.kts:
kotlin {
    jvm("jvmKtor") {
        attributes.attribute(/* ... */)
    }
    jvm("jvmOkHttp") {
        attributes.attribute(/* ... */)
    }

    sourceSets {
        val commonMain by getting
        val commonJvmMain by sourceSets.creating {
            dependsOn(commonMain)
            dependencies {
                // Shared dependencies
            }
        }
        val jvmKtorMain by getting {
            dependsOn(commonJvmMain)
            dependencies {
                // Ktor dependencies
            }
        }
        val jvmOkHttpMain by getting {
            dependsOn(commonJvmMain)
            dependencies {
                // OkHttp dependencies
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> The implementation comes with a non-trivial configuration complexity:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The implementation comes with non-trivial configuration complexity:
```

* You have to set up Gradle attributes on the `:shared` side and each consumer's side. Otherwise, Gradle can't
  resolve dependencies in such projects because it's not clear whether the consumer should receive the Ktor-based

>   or the OkHttp-based implementation without additional information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
or the OkHttp-based implementation.
```

* You have to set up the `commonJvmMain` source set manually.

> * The configuration involves a handful of low-level Gradle and the Kotlin Gradle plugin abstractions and APIs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The configuration involves a handful of low-level Gradle and Kotlin Gradle plugin
```

**What's the best practice now?**

> The configuration gets complicated because Ktor-based and OkHttp-based implementations are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The configuration is complex because Ktor-based and OkHttp-based implementations are
```

_in the same Gradle project_. In many cases, it's possible to extract those parts into separate Gradle projects.

> Here's a general outline of this refactoring:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here's a general outline of such a refactoring:
```

> 1. Replace two duplicating targets from the original project with a single target. If you had a shared source set between

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Replace two duplicated targets from the original project with a single target. If you had a shared source set between
```

   these targets, move its sources and configuration to the default source set of the newly created target:

    ```kotlin
    // shared/build.gradle.kts:
    kotlin {
        jvm()
        
        sourceSets {
            jvmMain {
                // Copy the configuration of jvmCommonMain here
            }
        }
    }
    ```

2. Add two new Gradle projects, usually by calling `include` in your `settings.gradle.kts` file. For example:

    ```kotlin
    include(":okhttp-impl")
    include(":ktor-impl")
    ```

3. Configure each new Gradle project:

   * Most likely, you don't need to apply the `kotlin("multiplatform")` plugin, as these projects compile only to one
     target. In this example, you can apply `kotlin("jvm")`.
   * Move the content of original target-specific source sets to their respective projects, for example,
     from `jvmKtorMain` to `ktor-impl/src`.
   * Copy the configuration of source sets: dependencies, compiler options, and so on.

>    * Add a dependency from a new Gradle project to the original one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Add a dependency from the new Gradle project to the original one.
```

    ```kotlin
    // ktor-impl/build.gradle.kts:
    plugins {
        kotlin("jvm")
    }
    
    dependencies {
        project(":shared") // Add dependency on the original project
        // Copy dependencies of jvmKtorMain here
    }
    
    kotlin {
        compilerOptions {
            // Copy compiler options of jvmKtorMain here
        }
    }
    ```

While this approach requires more work on the initial setup, it doesn't use any low-level entities of Gradle and
the Kotlin Gradle plugin, making it easier to use and maintain the resulting build.

> Unfortunately, we can't provide detailed migration steps for each case. If the instructions above don't work

> > for you, describe your case in this [YouTrack issue](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-59316).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> for you, describe your use case in this [YouTrack issue](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-59316).
```

>
{type="tip"}

**When do the changes take effect?**

Here's the planned deprecation cycle:

> * 1.9.20: introduce a deprecation warning when similar multiple targets are used in Kotlin Multiplatform projects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* 1.9.20: introduce a deprecation warning when multiple similar targets are used in Kotlin Multiplatform projects
```

now triggers a deprecation diagnostic.

**When do the changes take effect?**

Here's the planned deprecation cycle:

* <=1.9.0: report a warning when `kotlin.mpp.androidSourceSetLayoutVersion=1` is used; the warning can be suppressed with
  `kotlin.mpp.androidSourceSetLayoutVersion1.nowarn=true` Gradle property
* 1.9.20: raise this warning to an error; the error **cannot** be suppressed
* \>1.9.20: remove support for `kotlin.mpp.androidSourceSetLayoutVersion=1`; the Kotlin Gradle plugin ignores the property

<anchor name="common-sourceset-with-dependson-deprecation"></anchor>
## Deprecated commonMain and commonTest with custom dependsOn

**What's changed?**

The `commonMain` and `commonTest` source sets usually represent the roots of the `main` and `test` source set hierarchies,
respectively. However, it was possible to override that by manually configuring `dependsOn` relations of these source sets.

Maintaining such configuration requires extra effort and knowledge about multiplatform build internals. Additionally,
it decreases code readability and reusability of the code because you need to read the particular buildscript

> to be sure whether the `commonMain` is the root of the `main` source set hierarchy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to be sure whether `commonMain` is the root of the `main` source set hierarchy.
```

Therefore, accessing `dependsOn` on `commonMain` and `commonTest` is now deprecated.

**What's the best practice now?**

Suppose you need to migrate to 1.9.20 the `customCommonMain` source set that uses `commonMain.dependsOn(customCommonMain)`.

> In most cases, `customCommonMain` participates in the same compilations as `commonMain`, so you can merge the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In most cases, `customCommonMain` participates in the same compilations as `commonMain`, so you can merge
```

`customCommonMain` into `commonMain`:

1. Copy sources of `customCommonMain` into `commonMain`.
2. Add all dependencies of `customCommonMain` to `commonMain`.
3. Add all compiler option settings of `customCommonMain` to `commonMain`.

In rare cases, `customCommonMain` might be participating in more compilations than `commonMain`.

> Such configuration requires additional low-level configuration of the buildscript. If you're not sure if that's your case,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Such a configuration requires additional low-level configuration of the build script. If you're not sure if that's your use case,
```

it most likely isn't.

> If it's actually your case, "swap" these two source sets. To do that, move the sources and settings of `customCommonMain`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If it is your use case, "swap" these two source sets by moving the sources and settings of `customCommonMain`
```

to `commonMain` and vice versa.

**When do the changes take effect?**

Here's the planned deprecation cycle:

* 1.9.0: report a warning when `dependsOn` is used in `commonMain`
* \>=1.9.20: report an error when `dependsOn` is used in `commonMain` or `commonTest`

<anchor name="target-presets-deprecation"></anchor>
## Deprecated target presets API

**What's changed?**

In the very early development stages, Kotlin Multiplatform introduced an API for working with so-called _target presets_.
Each target preset essentially represented a factory for Kotlin Multiplatform targets. This API turned out to be largely

> redundant, as DSL functions like `jvm()` or `iosSimulatorArm64()` cover the same cases while being much more straightforward

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
redundant, as DSL functions like `jvm()` or `iosSimulatorArm64()` cover the same use cases while being much more straightforward
```

removed from the public API of the Kotlin Gradle plugin in future releases. This includes:

* The `presets` property in `org.jetbrains.kotlin.gradle.dsl.KotlinMultiplatformExtension`
* The `org.jetbrains.kotlin.gradle.plugin.KotlinTargetPreset` interface and all its inheritors
* The `fromPreset` overloads

**What's the best practice now?**

Use respective [Kotlin targets](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/multiplatform-dsl-reference.html#targets) instead, for example:

<table header-style="top">
    <tr>
        <td>Before</td>
        <td>Now</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
<td>

```kotlin
kotlin {
    targets {
        fromPreset(presets.iosArm64, 'ios')
    }
}
```

</td>
<td>

```kotlin
kotlin {
    iosArm64()
}
```

</td>
</tr>
</table>

**When do the changes take effect?**

Here's the planned deprecation cycle:

* 1.9.20: report a warning on any usages of the presets-related API
* 2.0: raise this warning to an error
* \>2.0: remove the presets-related API from the public API of the Kotlin Gradle plugin; sources that still use it fail
  with "unresolved reference" errors, and binaries (for example, Gradle plugins) might fail with linkage errors

>   unless recompiled against the modern versions of the Kotlin Gradle plugin

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
unless recompiled against the latest versions of the Kotlin Gradle plugin
```
